Dear Daniel and David,
	These are my comments on the SplitsTree4 beta manual and apply to the 
June 2, 2005 version of the manual.  Since I don't have LaTex I was unable to 
incorporate the comments directly into the text that Daniel sent me.
	Both the program and the manual are  obviously a labor of love, and 
both are very well done. I think that SplitsTree should become a widely used 
tool, not just a tool that is limited to the most sophisticated and expert 
phylogeneticists.  I have therefore approached this from the perspective of a 
non-mathematician and a fairly naive phylogeneticist.  Aside from a few minor 
glitches the vast bulk of the manual that describes the use of SplitsTree4 is 
fine.  I'll document those glitches below.

	My main concern is with Section 5 (pages 7 & 8) that explains Splits, 
Trees and Networks.  It is essential that the user develops a reasonable sense 
of what a split is, what a network is, and how the graphs should be 
interpreted.  Most potential users will not be mathematicians and the language 
of mathematics will be unfamiliar and intimidating.  The immediate reaction on 
encountering paragraphs 4 & 5 of that section will be for the eyes to glaze 
over and to skip that section, with the result that what follows will not be 
understood and will also be passed over.
	Below I've suggested one possible revision for that section.  The 
revision is based on my understanding which, of course, could be entirely 
incorrect.


(Paragraph 4)
…is based on  the fundamental mathematical concept of a split.  A split is the 
bipartitioning of a set of taxa under consideration, and any phylogenetic tree 
defines such a set of splits.  For example, if we are given an alignment of 
binary sequences

A 010011010110
B 100001010110
C 011001101110
D 010001111111

then each non-constant column in the alignment defines a split of the taxon set 
consisting of those taxa with the value 0 and those with the value 1.
The 
first column splits the taxa into two sets (A,C) and  (B), while the fourth 
column does not define a split because the characters are constant.

Mathematically, for a set of X taxa any phylogenetic tree T defines a set of 
such splits called the split encoding ?(T) of T, as follows:… (remainder of the 
paragraph).

???
Visually, the tree T on the left becomes the two subtrees TA andTB on the right 
by deleting the edge (branch) e, and the split S = A,B,C,D/ E,F.


(Next paragraph, paragraph 5, as is)

A phylogenetic tree can be thought of as an idealized representation of the 
historical relationships among a set of taxa; and tree building methods are 
attempts to find a the set of compatible splits that are most consistent with 
the data according to some algorithm.  Often there are multiple tree that are 
equally consistent with the data, i.e. multiple sets of compatible splits.  In 
general that collection of splits will be incompatible.  Moreover, there exist 
inference methods such as split decomposition in Neighbor-Net that compute a 
set of incompatible splits from the data in the form of a given distance 
matrix.  Note that split decomposition produces a set of splits that are called 
weakly compatible, while Neighbor-Net produces a set of splits that is 
circular, as originally defined in [1].

In the next paragraph, paragraph 7, add the following sentence:
"…required to represent a single split.  A phylogenetic tree is therefore a 
special case of a split network.  In SplitsTree4…" 
	Paragraph 7 describes a band of parallel edges.   The term "edge" will 
be unclear to most users.  For trees I've taken "edge" as synonymous with 
"branch".  In a network should I think of parallel edges as equivalent branches 
in alternative trees?

Paragraph 8 is particularly well written and helpful.  Still, it is difficult 
to know how to interpret a splits graph.  I've tried to get a picture of a 
splits network into my mind based on Section 5, and I've come to think of it as 
what I would get if I superimposed a set of equally parsimonious trees, or I 
superimposed upon the most likely ML tree several slightly less likely trees.  
I think of a bunch of parallelograms as and area where there are lots of more 
or less equally good alternatives, and the remainder as portions where I can be 
fairly confident of the tree-like structure.

???
	Following paragraph 8 it would be very helpful to show a splits diagram 
and to discuss its interpretation explicitly.


	Paragraph 9 on reticulate networks raises several questions:
(1) what do you mean by a hybridization event?  How is that different from a 
recombination event?
(2)  why are recombination networks based on binary sequences?  Is this because 
you have not yet figured out how to base recombination networks on DNA or 
protein sequences, or because you are using recombination in a different sense 
than biologists do?

	Many users will wonder why you discuss things in terms of binary 
sequences at all (once they work out what a binary sequence is).  Because their 
data will almost always be DNA, RNA or protein sequences they will wonder what 
binary sequences have to do with anything biological.  It might be helpful if 
you mention that binary sequences could be used to represent the presence or 
absence of restriction sites.

??
	Paragraph 10: again, I suspect that most users will want not a more 
detailed, mathematically justified, discussion of the fundamental concepts, but 
a more intuitive, biological, non-mathematical discussion.

Minor things
Section 2, page 4:  It would be helpful to begin with the conventions used in 
the manual; i.e. Analysis ---> Configure Pipline means "from the Analysis 
choose the Configure Pipeline item".
Main:Source means "in the Main window the Source tab".

Section 4, paragraph 3 :   "where written in C++" should be "were written in 
C++"

Section 5, paragraph 2, first sentence:  "using phylogenetic a tree"  should be 
"using a phylogenetic tree"

Section 8 paragraph 2.  The behavior is not as described.  When PhyML is not 
found it brings up a warning with no dialog that would allow the user to find 
PhyML.  By the way, is PhyML the same as dnaml?

???
Section 8, paragraph 4:  in the Pipeline window there is a box to provide the 
path to an exgternal application.  Most users have no idea what a path is, much 
less how to specify one.  Give an example along the lines of:  Suppose the 
SplitsTree4 application is in the Applications folder and the external 
application PhyML is in the folder Phylip elsewhere on the drive.  The path 
would look like this (path) meaning that the Phylip folder is within the X 
folder, that is within the Y folder that is on the volume (hard drive) named Z".

???
In this section it would be nice to tell the user how to add other external 
programs such as TreeFinder or MrBAyes to SplitsTree4.  Assuming that a plugin 
is required, where would they obtain such a plugin?  How would they install it?

Section 9, paragraph 2 ( page 10):  The MedikanNetwork menu item is greyed out. 
 Is it not yet implemented, or is it nor appropriate for DNA character data and 
thus not available?

???
Section 10.1.  The scale bar is selected or deselected in the General tab, not 
the status line tab.  The scale bar has no units, nor are units mentioned in 
the manual.   If the units are mutations per site that should be mentioned and 
preferably  indicated under the bar itself on the network graph.


Section 11:  Also need to point out that the graph can be dragged around the 
window by clicking on a node, and that one can click on a terminal node to 
drage the node and thus change the edge angle in order to visually separate 
crowded labels.

Section 11, last bullet item:  the sentence is incomplete.  How do you open the 
Node and Edge window?

???
Section 12.1, bullet item 2, last sentence:  change to read "If the current 
document is non-empty, or the Main:Network tab is selected, then the selected 
file is oopened in a new window"  (Uless this is a bug).

Section 12.1, bullet item 3  The File --> Open Recent submenu… 

???
Section 12.1  Bullet items 4 & 5 do not exist, and the Import choice is not 
mentioned in the Manual

???
Section 12.1, last bullet item:  The Quit command is under the SplitsTree4 menu 
in the Macintosh version.

???
Section 12.2, last item:  The Preferences menu choice is under SplitsTree4 menu 
in the Macintosh version

Section 12.3  Start a new paragraph after the first sentence to maintan same 
structure as in the rest of this section.

Section 12.4, 4th form last item:  shouldn't "in the network are unselected" 
read "in the network are selected"??


??? FIX
Section 12.6, last item on page 16 (Trees--->PhyML)  The default window size 
for the dialog is too small and appears to be gibberish until the window is 
enlarged.  For some reason the window has no scroll bar and it tries to print 
everything overlapping (may be specific to Mac version)

Section 12.7 item 1:  change Networks -->NeighborNet to Networks -->NNet

????
Section 12.7, last iem:  The Networks-->RecombinationNetwork item is not 
present.  Coming later?

???
Section 12.10, first item is under SplitsTree4 menu in Mac version

Section 13:  Begin with "The Pipline window is accessed from the 
Analysis-->Configure Pipeline menu."

Section 13,First sentence: Change Tue to The

Section 13.7, page 21 under Confidence Threshold : change "removes all splits" 
to "removes any split"


???
Section 15, first tiem:  Under SplitsTree4 menu in the MAcintosh version

Section 15, in Maintain Edge Lengths descriptions:  change "we what the 
network" to "we want the menu"

Section 16., under Nodes and Edges:Edges:  insert a comma after splits ids on 
the last line.

???
Section 16.8:  The About menu item is under the SplitsTree4 menu in the Mac 
version

Section 17, line 4:  Change "However. this algorithm" to "However, the 
algorithm"

???
Section 21 (Examples)  I was unable to find an Examples folder installed 
anywhere.  Is this not yet implemented?

References [8]  The current version of Phylip is 3.63 for which the citation is 
Felsenstein, J. 2004. PHYLIP (Phylogeny Inference Package) version 3.6. 
Distributed by the author. Department of Genome Sciences, University of 
Washington, Seattle.


	That's it.  All I've got at this time.

Thanks again for a well written manual.

Barry



